Writing a grammar and Parser for Blazon
Thomas Heyes
April 5, 2013

Abstract
Blazon is the semi-formal language of family crest and heraldry, dating
back to the twelfth century. Using a well structured grammar to describe a
coat of arms in a top down approach the language provides a robust yet ﬂexible way to deﬁne a textual description of what is naturally a very graphical
subject. Using a test-driven development model I have produced a project
which is capable of parsing a large subset of Blazon. Encompassing several ﬁelds of Computer Science ranging from parsing to HTML5 graphics
the application provides a platform that demonstrates how modern concepts
and technologies can be used to represent a subject that pre-dates them by
centuries.
Firstly giving a brief background and description of the language of Blazon, this report goes onto describes both how the Blazon parsing application
works as well as and how the project was implemented and tested. From a
simple shield of a single colour through partitioning into sections and sub
partitioning as well as covering diﬀerent line-types before heading onto geometric charges, honourable charges and the rule of tincture before ﬁnally
discussing semi-formal charges.
After thoroughly describing the language I go onto discuss the implementation of the project using test driven development. Producing lots of
iterations increasing the functionality of the project gradually and performing
regression testing to ensure the soundness of my code base. Initially starting
with a couple of Python script based prototypes I describe how the project
was iteratively built into a fully ﬂedged web application over the course of
the academic year. Given more time I would attempt to expand the project
further into parsing and drawing a larger subset of Blazon with features such
as Counter Charging and combining shields with Quartering.

Chapter 1
Introduction
My project was to Write a Grammar and Parser for Blazon. Another student
project by Luke Torjussen done the year before my own had attempted, very
successfully, to produce an application that both parsed and drew representations of Blazoned coats of arms. This prior project used a parse generator
to handle the grammar, lexing and parsing of the language. It was my objective to see if performing the parsing by hand in my own application could
realise a more complete representation of Blazon.
Initially then my project was entirely based in tokenising, lexing, parsing and validating Blazon sentences. However my project grew later-on to
also attempt to encompass producing a graphical representation of a parsed
Blazon sentence as well as providing a plain English translation.

Aims

The aim of my project was to produce an application which upon receiving
a Blazon sentence would ﬁrstly validate the sentence according to the rules
of the Blazon language and then produce an English translation.

Achievable

Chapter 2
What is Blazon?
Blazon is the language of heraldry and family crests, it dates back to the
twelfth century and provides a strict set of rules about how to produce a
coat of arms.

Some Terminology

Blazon, like any other language, has some unique terminology used to address
certain aspects of heraldry. Anyone attempting utilize the language will need
to familiarise themselves with this terminology.

The Seven Tinctures

The most fundamental elements of Blazon are the Tinctures. Tinctures are
the set of colours allowed in coats of arms.
It is important to realise that the Tinctures don’t deﬁne the tone or shade
of colour just which colour the current section of the of the shield should be.
Whist Blazon is not a truly natural language

How to Blazon a Coat of Arms

Partitioning a Field

Sub-Partitioning

Chapter 3
Deﬁning a Grammar for Blazon

What is a grammar?

Context Free Blazon


Formatting Input


Tokenizing Strings
